# Introduction

The Democracy Earth Foundation is working to update government for the 21st century by building a blockchain-based liquid-democracy platform. In that pursuit, the foundation has spent the past 6 years researching, experimenting, learning and building at the intersection of technology and politics. In our white paper, [The Social Smart Contract](https://github.com/DemocracyEarth/paper/blob/master/README.mediawiki), we explore in detail how a blockchain-based liquid democracy can help the world solve some of the most pressing challenges facing democracy, such as lack of participation and authoritarianism.

The Social Smart Contract contains some technical vocabulary and other kinds of information that are not background knowledge possessed by all readers. Democracy Academy intends to provide foundational knowledge so that anyone can understand The Social Smart Contract and have a sound understanding of the topics it refers to.

While Democracy Earth is focused on building civic tech designed to be easy to use on an everyday basis, we also view it as important to provide education around the ideas and technology that have made this possible. We will use Democracy Academy to educate about blockchains and liquid democracy. We hope to foster  a global movement where everyone starts to claim participation as their right.

The content of Democracy Academy was developed collaboratively by students for students, but will be helpful to anyone curious about these topics. Our goal is for everyone following the eight week online curriculum to emerge with a strong grasp of blockchain technology concepts, as well as the history behind the development of the Democracy Earth Foundation governance platform. It is our hope that in doing so we can help a new generation of leaders effectively learn as much as possible about the intersection of technology and politics - and Democracy Earth’s crowd-sourced proposal - so they are fully equipped to advocate for it, contribute to it, and promote it around the world.

Both the White Paper and the material of Democracy Academy are not intended to remain static and we welcome contributions from readers to continue improving them. Like Democracy itself, Democracy Academy must always be a work in progress. 



<a name="Background"></a>
# 1.0 Background

In Week 1, we discuss the emergence of civic tech/democracy tech and the history of the Democracy Earth Foundation. We will provide an overview of the vision and journey of Democracy Earth founders, and how their experiences and lessons shape our software development and movement.

##  1.1 A group of hacktivists tried to improve their country

Long before Democracy Earth and Sovereign were created, its co-founders Pia Mancini and Santiago Siri, founded Democracy OS, one of the earliest civic tech projects of its kind. As Pia stated in a 2016 interview with The Guardian, Democracy OS could not have emerged in a stable country like the US or UK, but only in a country where politics were bad enough that people were willing to take risks. Argentina, a country with some of the highest internet access in Latin America, yet some of the most corrupt and unresponsive politics, offered the perfect birthplace for this historic civic tech.

While working in traditional politics, Pia became frustrated by the inability to fix pervasive issues due to lethargy and systemic corruption. She spent years developing training programs to teach democratic values, preparing civil leaders for public office. Through these efforts she was able to get strong candidates elected including mayors and governors. Yet, eventually it became clear that it was not enough to try to place better people in the same system, but that the very system itself was an issue; It distanced the voters from decision-making, creating a breakdown in communication between political leaders and ordinary citizens. That inspired her and Santi to create an application called Democracy OS, where citizens could learn about current congressional policy proposals and vote on them, as well as make their own proposals, debate and vote on them. It translated all proposals into plain language, and was accessible to anyone with a smartphone. Though Pia and her collaborators offered the Democracy OS platform to political parties, they had no takers; instead, they were "sent away like little kids", as she noted in her [2014 TED Talk](https://www.ted.com/talks/pia_mancini_how_to_upgrade_democracy_for_the_internet_era). 

They were not the first civic technologists to learn the lesson that software alone could not solve the deeply ingrained distance between the politicians and the citizens – although better technology was needed, the main barrier was still a cultural one. Undaunted by this rejection, Pia and Santi decided to take a different path, and form their own political party called  “Partido de la Red,” or the “Net Party” in English. This party promised to vote in line with how citizens voted on DemocracyOS. In 2013, they campaigned with a large Trojan Horse made out of wood, driving it around the neighbourhoods of Buenos Aires. The Trojan Horse signified that while the Net Party was going through the same process of campaigning and electing officials like typical parties, it was only a front -- they had no intention to behave like one. Unlike all the other parties, they intended to actually let their citizens guide their decisions directly through their app. While Partido de la Red candidates did not win an elected seat in the parliament, they received 22,000 votes. It was enough for the Congress to take notice and to launch an instance of Democracy OS to discuss three issues, two on public transport and one on the use of public space.

Partido de la Red and DemocracyOS taught Pia and Santi three important lessons that still ring true today:

1. The first is that civic tech has the potential to revolutionize government. Though they failed to gain a Parliamentary seat, Partido de la Red forced the government to take notice and use Democracy OS for those three issues. The idea of online participation had power - it resonated with people.

2. But even with this success, the government did not promise to vote in alignment with the decision taken by the citizens on the Democracy OS votes. This led to the second lesson: while civic tech has a true potential to change government, this change is far from inevitable and a simple app that serves as an interface with Congress is not enough to make that happen.

3. The third, and most painful lesson was about corruption. [The party had spies infiltrating their party meetings](https://medium.com/@santisiri/baptism-of-fire-100392b05726) to generate confusion, were attacked online, and finally were asked to bribe a judge in order to be able to run for the 2015 elections. Going through that difficult first-hand contact with corruption taught them how difficult it is to change the system from within. As Santi says, “ it is much more likely that it will change you first.”


## 1.2 Silicon Valley

In 2015 the Silicon Valley accelerator YCombinator - backer of Reddit and AirBnb, among others - invited Pia and Santi to join the Y15 class of nonprofits, selected for their potential for global impact . On this trip they met Herb Stephens, who became the co-founder and the treasurer of Democracy Earth Foundation. For 25 years, Herb has been working as a serial software entrepreneur, building systems where power purposefully shifts to the user through technology. Since learning of blockchain technology in 2012 and considering it “the best invention since the Internet itself”, Herb dedicated the rest of his career to social entrepreneurism.

Together, Herb, Santi, Pia and Virgile Devile - a long-time collaborator from France - formed the Democracy Earth Foundation, a U.S. (CA) 501©(3) non-profit.

These early civic tech experiences prepared the team to go beyond the constraints of the current political status quo. The team adopted a theory of change best described in Buckminster Fullers’ famous quote: **“You don’t change the existing reality by fighting against it. To change something, build a new model that makes the existing model obsolete.”** In other words, just building an app to interface with existing political systems won’t do - the tool needs to be something that brings such an obvious and enormous improvement to governance it makes the current system outdated.

Their approach was to make use of a new technology, that of blockchains, to create a censorship resistant peer-to-peer democracy. These terms will be explained in greater detail later on. The new focus was to bring massive improvements to three fundamental pillars of governance:

Voting: *The current system for voting is both insecure and difficult to audit because it is highly centralized. It can be hacked and manipulated in many ways, and the only people who are able to check the voting rolls are a very small group of election officials. With a blockchain based system, manipulating results is functionally impossible as all votes are recorded in an immutable public ledger that anyone can audit.*

Identity: *Today we receive identity from governments with passports and ID cards, and from websites with passwords, logins and profiles. The Democracy Earth platform will employ a decentralized ID system. This will allow citizens to have a secure form of identification that is beyond the influence of any third party. Democracy Earth will help citizens own their data and identity through the use of new cryptographic technologies, which we will explain later in this material.*

Representation: *Our system does not provide the right incentives for our representatives to represent us very well. If we disagree with how they voted, we have to wait until the next election cycle to try to remove them which could be many years. We also are forced to bundle our opinions into one person rather than letting multiple people, that can each be an expert on a different field, represent us on different issues. That is why Democracy Earth is building a liquid democracy platform that allows for users to propose, debate, and vote directly on issues or to delegate their vote to someone they trust to vote for them. Representation will be more responsive when you can delegate your vote to anyone and immediately revoke it if they vote incorrectly or behave unethically.*


## 1.3 Sovereign

Inspired by improving those functions of government – voting, representation and identity – Democracy Earth created its platform called Sovereign. There are three main components to the vision for the governance platform: it has to be blockchain based, open source, and as simple as a social media platform.

1. **Why blockchain and not just an online platform?** In the next section we will learn exactly how a blockchain works to store information in an incorruptible way. Until then, what is important to know now is that blockchain technology is necessary for security and censorship resistance. In order for the results of votes to be trusted on this platform, it has to be blockchain-based, so that all users are able to see that votes have been tallied accurately. 

Web-based voting platforms are centrally run. They have one organization that manages the platform, and this centralization makes it easier to shut them down if necessary. Blockchain based platforms are decentralized. The platform is maintained by nodes – essentially people running a program on their computer – so it is much harder to shut down. Alternative governance platforms are most necessary in areas where the government is repressive, so the places that Sovereign would be most useful might also be where it would face the most censorship. By using blockchain technology, Sovereign can be both resistant to hacking and censorship.

2. **Why must the platform be open source?** Open source is when software is accessible on an open platform for free which allows anyone to examine it or use it's code. Another property of open source is that anyone is able to contribute code, so it is a truly open and transparent process of creation.  With Democracy Earth’s platform it is not just the code that is open source, but also all the decision-making, as topics about the platform are regularly debated on Sovereign’s Github page, a site which hosts open source projects. Democracy Earth is so committed to open source that even our White Paper was written on Github, with contributors from around the world.

3. **Why should Sovereign have a “social media feel”?**
Because it needs to be simple, accessible, and something that people will want to use everyday. People should be encouraged to participate in their own governance but too often they are actively shut out by dense and legalistic policy language or practices that are difficult to understand if one does not have a political science or law degree. Sovereign aims to do the exact opposite – to have a user friendly interface that allows for anyone to create a topic of discussion or a vote, to engage in debates, and to vote on a topic or delegate their votes to someone else to vote for them. While we have mainly discussed the platform as a tool for politics, people could also use it to make other group decisions that are of a less political nature like deciding on food for their office or for a name change for their soccer club. The point is that the platform provides a tool for group decision-making, at whatever scale a user needs, that is inclusive and as easy as clicking “like”.

The simplicity of most social media platforms allow them to reach a massive audience, which has positioned those platforms as powerful influencers on politics. That being said,  Sovereign will have a social media feel but will not have the other practices of social media platforms. Unlike Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and many other platforms it will not aggregate those likes, or in this case “votes” and sell that information to companies so they can advertise to you. It will not put users into ideological boxes where they can only see topics and votes that they agree with. Right now, users are the products of most social media platforms. Most do not realize to what degree their information is being sold to researchers and advertisers, or to what degree their consumer, political, and cultural preferences are being manipulated. With the revelations of how user data was improperly shared with consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, during the 2016 election and how this data was then used to influence the election results through targeted campaign advertising, it is clear that data ownership is a critical issue for protecting free thinking and democracies. The technology and transparency behind Sovereign allows it to be a forum for true discussion and decision making but not an algorithmically curated echo chamber. Democracy Earth wants to take the good parts of social media – the clarity, the accessibility, the way it is used across the world, the way it facilitates discussion and the sharing of stories – and add it to Sovereign. Due to the decentralized nature of a blockchain based entity, there will be no main governing body that would have the ability to collect data or manipulate feeds. Sovereign would not be able to mirror any of the negative aspects of social media. Most importantly, every user will be able to own his data, meaning that they can’t be exposed to the kinds of privacy breaches or psychological manipulation enabled by centralized applications like Facebook.

Also unlike social media, expressions of preference on Sovereign are designed to lead to action. A “like” or a “retweet” might show support, but in practical terms the only thing that they do is feed the editorial purposes of attention-mining algorithms that generate profit to those private organizations. With Sovereign, because there is no middleman, all benefits from the use of the platform go straight to the users. They keep their data, they make meaningful decisions about their own lives.

Ultimately, Sovereign will help realize the principles expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:

*“Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers. Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association. Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives.”*
